[OTAGENT-1027] Expand Collector health metrics setup with Prometheus and OTLP tabs (#36361)
DataDog/documentation: content/en/opentelemetry/integrations/collector_health_metrics.md

{{< img src="/opentelemetry/collector_exporter/collector_health_metrics.png" alt="OpenTelemetry Collector health metrics dashboard" style="width:100%;" >}}

The OpenTelemetry Collector exposes internal telemetry as metrics. You can collect these metrics and send them to Datadog to monitor Collector health and pipeline throughput.

You can collect Collector health metrics in two ways:

- **Prometheus**: Scrape the Collector's internal Prometheus endpoint with the [Prometheus receiver][1] and forward the metrics through a metrics pipeline to the Datadog Exporter.

> - **OTLP**: Configure the Collector's internal telemetry to export metrics directly to the [Datadog OTLP metrics intake endpoint][4] over OTLP HTTP.

Reviewer: I know I've suggested it before, but I'm no longer sure how good of an idea it is to send the Collector's internal metrics directly to the endpoint without enrichment.

It's definitely simpler and more reliable than relying on the health of the pipeline to report the pipeline's health, but it means the Collector metrics have no chance to get a proper host name, which isn't super ergonomic and breaks the default Collector dashboard. Are we okay with that?

If we don't want to make a choice, we could list both possibilities in the docs.

Author: Collector metrics can still get a proper host name as long as they properly set service.telemetry.resource. But I agree that is not as easy to configure as resource detection processor etc. I can add a warning about this caveat if users choose to do OTLP

## Setup

The two tabs below show alternative ways to configure the pipeline. Pick one based on whether you want a Prometheus-style scrape or a direct OTLP push. The [`service.telemetry.metrics` fields](#servicetelemetrymetrics-fields) and [resource attribute](#optional-tag-with-resource-attributes) sections that follow apply to both setups.

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab "Prometheus" %}}

Configure the Collector to expose its internal metrics on a Prometheus pull endpoint. Then scrape that endpoint with the [Prometheus receiver][101] and route the data through a metrics pipeline to the [Datadog Exporter][102].

```yaml
receivers:
  prometheus/internal:
    config:
      scrape_configs:
        - job_name: 'otelcol'
          scrape_interval: 10s
          static_configs:
            - targets: ['0.0.0.0:8888']

exporters:
  datadog:
    api:
      key: ${env:DD_API_KEY}
      site: <DATADOG_SITE>
    metrics:
      resource_attributes_as_tags: true
    sending_queue:
      batch:
        flush_timeout: 10s

service:
  telemetry:
    metrics:

>       level: detailed

Reviewer: The current recommended config keeps `service::telemetry::metrics::level: normal`, and I'm not sure we should recommend changing that to `detailed` by default. There can be some fairly high volume metrics in there that should only be used when debugging.

Author: Good catch, yes `normal` makes more sense

      readers:
        - pull:
            exporter:
              prometheus:
                host: 0.0.0.0
                port: 8888
                without_type_suffix: true
                without_units: true
                without_scope_info: true
                # with_resource_constant_labels:
                #   included: ["service.name", "service.instance.id"]
                #   excluded: []
      # views:
      #   - selector:
      #       instrument_name: otelcol_processor_*
      #     stream:
      #       aggregation:
      #         drop: {}
  pipelines:
    metrics:
      receivers: [prometheus/internal]
      exporters: [datadog]
```

Replace `<DATADOG_SITE>` with your [Datadog site][106]. Your site is {{< region-param key="dd_site" code="true" >}}.

> The `service.telemetry.metrics` block exposes the Collector's internal metrics on `0.0.0.0:8888`. The `prometheus/internal` receiver scrapes that same endpoint and the metrics pipeline forwards them to Datadog.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `service.telemetry.metrics` block exposes the Collector's internal metrics on `0.0.0.0:8888`. The `prometheus/internal` receiver scrapes that same endpoint, and the metrics pipeline forwards them to Datadog.
```

**`pull.exporter.prometheus` options:**

`host` / `port`
: Address to expose the Prometheus endpoint on. Defaults to `localhost:8888`. Use `0.0.0.0` to expose outside the loopback interface.

`without_type_suffix`

> : When `true`, drops the type suffix (for example, `_total` for counters) from metric names. The Collector defaults to `true`, which produces names such as `otelcol_exporter_sent_metric_points` instead of `otelcol_exporter_sent_metric_points_total`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
: When `true` (the Collector default), drops the type suffix (for example, `_total` for counters) from metric names. Names appear as `otelcol_exporter_sent_metric_points` instead of `otelcol_exporter_sent_metric_points_total`.
```

`without_units`
: When `true`, drops the unit suffix (for example, `_seconds`, `_bytes`) from metric names.

`without_scope_info`
: When `true`, suppresses the `otel_scope_info` metric and `otel_scope_*` labels.

`with_resource_constant_labels.included` / `with_resource_constant_labels.excluded`
: Allowlist and denylist of resource attributes to copy onto every exported metric as constant labels.

#### Optional: enrich with processors

> Add the [resource detection processor][103] to the metrics pipeline to automatically populate cloud and host resource attributes (for example, `host.id`, `cloud.provider`, `cloud.region`). Other processors such as [`transform`][104] or [`k8sattributes`][105] can also be added to the pipeline to further enrich or transform Collector health metrics before they are exported.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Add the [resource detection processor][103] to the metrics pipeline to automatically populate cloud and host resource attributes (for example, `host.id`, `cloud.provider`, `cloud.region`). You can also add other processors such as [`transform`][104] or [`k8sattributes`][105] to enrich or transform Collector health metrics before export.
```

[104]: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/processor/transformprocessor
[105]: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/processor/k8sattributesprocessor
[106]: /getting_started/site

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab "OTLP" %}}

Configure the Collector's internal telemetry to push metrics directly to the [Datadog OTLP metrics intake endpoint][201] using a periodic OTLP HTTP reader. This approach does not require a Prometheus receiver or a metrics pipeline for Collector health metrics.

```yaml
service:
  telemetry:
    metrics:
      level: detailed
      readers:
        - periodic:
            interval: 10000
            timeout: 5000
            exporter:
              otlp:
                protocol: http/protobuf
                endpoint: <OTLP_METRICS_ENDPOINT>
                temporality_preference: delta
                compression: gzip
                timeout: 5000
                headers:
                  - name: dd-api-key
                    value: ${env:DD_API_KEY}
                  - name: dd-otel-metric-config

>                     value: '{"resource_attributes_as_tags": true}'

Reviewer: Nit: I would also recommend `"instrumentation_scope_metadata_as_tags": true` since that's the default for the DD exporter (but not the backend endpoint), but it's not a big deal

`timeout`
: Maximum time in milliseconds to wait for an export to complete. Defaults to `30000` (30 seconds).

**`periodic.exporter.otlp` options:**

`protocol`
: One of `grpc`, `http/protobuf`, or `http/json`. Use `http/protobuf` for the Datadog OTLP metrics intake endpoint.

`endpoint`
: URL of the OTLP receiver. For Datadog, use {{< region-param key="otlp_metrics_endpoint" code="true" >}}.

`headers` / `headers_list`
: Headers to add to every export request. Use the structured `headers` list (each entry is a `{name, value}` pair) or `headers_list` as a URL-encoded string (for example, `dd-api-key=${env:DD_API_KEY}`).

`compression`
: Compression algorithm. One of `gzip` or `none`.

`timeout`
: Per-request timeout in milliseconds. Distinct from the reader-level `timeout`.

`temporality_preference`
: One of `cumulative`, `delta`, or `lowmemory`. The Datadog OTLP metrics intake endpoint requires `delta`.

`default_histogram_aggregation`
: One of `explicit_bucket_histogram` (default) or `base2_exponential_bucket_histogram`.

`insecure`
: When `true`, disables TLS. Defaults to `false`.

`certificate`, `client_certificate`, `client_key`

> : Paths to PEM files for custom CA verification and mTLS client authentication.

Reviewer 2: `mTLS` isn't on Datadog's well-known abbreviation exempt list — spell out on first use.

```suggestion
: Paths to PEM files for custom CA verification and mutual TLS (mTLS) client authentication.
```

> : Paths to PEM files for custom CA verification and mTLS client authentication.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
: Paths to PEM files for custom CA verification and mutual TLS (mTLS) client authentication.
```

[201]: /opentelemetry/setup/otlp_ingest/metrics/
[202]: /getting_started/site

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

### `service.telemetry.metrics` fields

The following top-level fields apply to both setups:

`level`

> : Verbosity of the Collector's internal metrics. One of `none`, `basic`, `normal` (default), or `detailed`. `detailed` is required to enable `views`.

Reviewer 2: Sentence begins with code/lowercase, which breaks reading flow. Rephrase to start with a verb:

```suggestion
: Verbosity of the Collector's internal metrics. One of `none`, `basic`, `normal` (default), or `detailed`. Set `level: detailed` to enable `views`.
```

> : Verbosity of the Collector's internal metrics. One of `none`, `basic`, `normal` (default), or `detailed`. `detailed` is required to enable `views`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
: Verbosity of the Collector's internal metrics. One of `none`, `basic`, `normal` (default), or `detailed`. Set `level: detailed` to enable `views`.
```

`views`
: Optional list of [SDK views][5] that drop, rename, filter, or re-aggregate specific instruments. Only available when `level: detailed`.

### Optional: tag with resource attributes

Use `service.telemetry.resource` to attach resource attributes (such as `k8s.cluster.name`, `service.instance.id`, or any [Datadog-mapped semantic convention][6]) to all telemetry the Collector emits about itself.

Use the legacy inline map format for a concise definition:

```yaml
service:
  telemetry:
    resource:
      k8s.cluster.name: my-cluster
      k8s.pod.name: ${env:HOSTNAME}
      service.instance.id: ${env:HOSTNAME}
      deployment.environment: prod
```

> The declarative `attributes` format supports explicit typing and a `schema_url`:

Reviewer: Nit: Since this is such a recent addition I would recommend noting that this is available starting from v0.151.0

```yaml
service:
  telemetry:
    resource:
      schema_url: https://opentelemetry.io/schemas/1.27.0
      attributes:
        - name: k8s.cluster.name
          value: my-cluster
        - name: k8s.pod.name
          value: ${env:HOSTNAME}
      detectors:
        attributes:
          included: [host.id, host.name, cloud.provider, cloud.region]
          excluded: []
```

> Use `detectors.attributes.included` and `detectors.attributes.excluded` to allowlist or denylist attributes contributed by SDK-side resource detectors. To suppress a default attribute such as `service.version`, specify it with a null value in the legacy inline format.

Reviewer: As far as I know `detectors` isn't yet implemented by `otelconf` and does nothing.

Author: Good call, I know it's being worked on but yeah it doesn't do anything yet

> These attributes are mapped to Datadog tags and host metadata. For the full list of supported mappings, see [OpenTelemetry Semantic Conventions and Datadog Conventions][6] and [Mapping OpenTelemetry Semantic Conventions to Hostnames][7].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Datadog maps these attributes to tags and host metadata. For the full list of supported mappings, see [OpenTelemetry Semantic Conventions and Datadog Conventions][6] and [Mapping OpenTelemetry Semantic Conventions to Hostnames][7].
```

{{< img src="/opentelemetry/collector_exporter/collector_health_metrics.png" alt="OpenTelemetry Collector health metrics dashboard" style="width:100%;" >}}

The OpenTelemetry Collector exposes internal telemetry as metrics. You can collect these metrics and send them to Datadog to monitor Collector health and pipeline throughput.

> You can collect Collector health metrics in two ways:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can send the Collector's health metrics to Datadog with two approaches:
```

- **Prometheus**: Scrape the Collector's internal Prometheus endpoint with the [Prometheus receiver][1] and forward the metrics through a metrics pipeline to the Datadog Exporter.
- **OTLP**: Configure the Collector's internal telemetry to export metrics directly to the [Datadog OTLP metrics intake endpoint][4] over OTLP HTTP.

## Setup

### Configure the pipeline

> Pick a tab based on whether you want a Prometheus-style scrape or a direct OTLP push. After configuring the pipeline, see the [Configuration reference](#configuration-reference) for all available options.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following tabs cover two approaches: a Prometheus-style scrape and a direct OTLP push. After configuring the pipeline, see the [Configuration reference](#configuration-reference) for all available options.
```

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab "Prometheus" %}}

> Configure the Collector to expose its internal metrics on a Prometheus pull endpoint. Then scrape that endpoint with the [Prometheus receiver][101] and route the data through a metrics pipeline to the [Datadog Exporter][102].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Configure the Collector to expose its internal metrics on a Prometheus pull endpoint. Scrape that endpoint with the [Prometheus receiver][101] and route the data through a metrics pipeline to the [Datadog Exporter][102].
```

```yaml
receivers:
  prometheus/internal:
    config:
      scrape_configs:
        - job_name: 'otelcol'
          scrape_interval: 10s
          static_configs:
            - targets: ['0.0.0.0:8888']

exporters:
  datadog:
    api:
      key: ${env:DD_API_KEY}
      site: <DATADOG_SITE>
    metrics:
      resource_attributes_as_tags: true
    sending_queue:
      batch:
        flush_timeout: 10s

service:
  telemetry:
    metrics:
      level: normal
      readers:
        - pull:
            exporter:
              prometheus:
                host: 0.0.0.0
                port: 8888
                without_type_suffix: true
                without_units: true
                without_scope_info: true
                # with_resource_constant_labels:
                #   included: ["service.name", "service.instance.id"]
                #   excluded: []
      # views:
      #   - selector:
      #       instrument_name: otelcol_processor_*
      #     stream:
      #       aggregation:
      #         drop: {}
  pipelines:
    metrics:
      receivers: [prometheus/internal]
      exporters: [datadog]
```

> Replace `<DATADOG_SITE>` with your [Datadog site][106]. Your site is {{< region-param key="dd_site" code="true" >}}.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Replace `<DATADOG_SITE>` with your [Datadog site][106]: {{< region-param key="dd_site" code="true" >}}.
```

> The `service.telemetry.metrics` block exposes the Collector's internal metrics on `0.0.0.0:8888`. The `prometheus/internal` receiver scrapes that same endpoint, and the metrics pipeline forwards them to Datadog.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `service.telemetry.metrics` block exposes the Collector's internal metrics on `0.0.0.0:8888`. The `prometheus/internal` receiver scrapes that same endpoint, and the metrics pipeline forwards the scraped metrics to Datadog.
```

> For all available options, see [`pull.exporter.prometheus` options](#pullexporterprometheus-options) in the [Configuration reference](#configuration-reference).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For all available options, see [`pull.exporter.prometheus` options](#pullexporterprometheus-options).
```

> #### Optional: enrich with processors

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Enrich with processors (optional)
```

```yaml
service:
  telemetry:
    metrics:
      level: normal
      readers:
        - periodic:
            interval: 10000
            timeout: 5000
            exporter:
              otlp:
                protocol: http/protobuf
                endpoint: <OTLP_METRICS_ENDPOINT>
                temporality_preference: delta
                compression: gzip
                timeout: 5000
                headers:
                  - name: dd-api-key
                    value: ${env:DD_API_KEY}
                  - name: dd-otel-metric-config
                    value: '{"resource_attributes_as_tags": true, "instrumentation_scope_metadata_as_tags": true}'
                # default_histogram_aggregation: explicit_bucket_histogram
                # headers_list: "dd-api-key=${env:DD_API_KEY}"
                # insecure: false
                # certificate: /path/to/ca.pem
                # client_certificate: /path/to/client.pem
                # client_key: /path/to/client.key
      # views:
      #   - selector:
      #       instrument_name: otelcol_processor_*
      #     stream:
      #       aggregation:
      #         drop: {}
```

> Replace `<OTLP_METRICS_ENDPOINT>` with the [Datadog OTLP metrics intake endpoint][201] for your [Datadog site][202]. Your endpoint is {{< region-param key="otlp_metrics_endpoint" code="true" >}}.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Replace `<OTLP_METRICS_ENDPOINT>` with the [Datadog OTLP metrics intake endpoint][201] for your [Datadog site][202]: {{< region-param key="otlp_metrics_endpoint" code="true" >}}.
```

The Datadog OTLP metrics intake endpoint accepts only delta metrics, so `temporality_preference: delta` is required. The `dd-api-key` header authenticates the request. For configuration options (including the `dd-otel-metric-config` header for customizing metric translation) and troubleshooting, see [Datadog OTLP Metrics Intake Endpoint][201].

<div class="alert alert-warning">
This setup pushes metrics directly to the OTLP intake endpoint, bypassing any enrichment that pipeline processors (such as <code>resourcedetection</code> or <code>k8sattributes</code>) would otherwise apply. To populate Datadog tags and host metadata (which are needed for hostname resolution and the default Collector dashboard), set the relevant attributes explicitly under <a href="#tag-with-resource-attributes-optional"><code>service.telemetry.resource</code></a>. If you need automatic hostname and cloud-attribute detection, use the Prometheus tab instead.

> </div>

Reviewer 2: ````suggestion
The Datadog OTLP metrics intake endpoint accepts only delta metrics, so `temporality_preference: delta` is required. The `dd-api-key` header authenticates the request, and the `dd-otel-metric-config` header customizes how metrics are translated to Datadog. For all the YAML fields available under the `periodic` reader, see [`periodic.exporter.otlp` options](#periodicexporterotlp-options); for the full list of metric-translation options and troubleshooting, see [Datadog OTLP Metrics Intake Endpoint][201].

<div class="alert alert-warning">
This setup pushes metrics directly to the OTLP intake endpoint, bypassing any enrichment that pipeline processors (such as <code>resourcedetection</code> or <code>k8sattributes</code>) would otherwise apply. To populate Datadog tags and host metadata (which are needed for hostname resolution and the default Collector dashboard), set the relevant attributes explicitly under <a href="#tag-with-resource-attributes-optional"><code>service.telemetry.resource</code></a>. If you need automatic hostname and cloud-attribute detection, use the Prometheus tab instead.
</div>
````

> For all available options, see [`periodic.exporter.otlp` options](#periodicexporterotlp-options).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> For all available options, see [`periodic.exporter.otlp` options](#periodicexporterotlp-options) in the [Configuration reference](#configuration-reference).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For all available options, see [`periodic.exporter.otlp` options](#periodicexporterotlp-options).
```

Use the legacy inline map format for a concise definition:

```yaml
service:
  telemetry:
    resource:
      k8s.cluster.name: my-cluster
      k8s.pod.name: ${env:HOSTNAME}
      service.instance.id: ${env:HOSTNAME}
      deployment.environment: prod
```

Alternatively, use the declarative `attributes` format, which supports explicit typing and a `schema_url`. This format requires Collector v0.151.0 or later:

```yaml
service:
  telemetry:
    resource:
      schema_url: https://opentelemetry.io/schemas/1.27.0
      attributes:
        - name: k8s.cluster.name
          value: my-cluster
        - name: k8s.pod.name
          value: ${env:HOSTNAME}
```

To suppress a default attribute such as `service.version`, specify it with a null value in the legacy inline format.

Datadog maps these attributes to tags and host metadata. For the full list of supported mappings, see [OpenTelemetry Semantic Conventions and Datadog Conventions][6] and [Mapping OpenTelemetry Semantic Conventions to Hostnames][7].

## Configuration reference

### `service.telemetry.metrics` fields

> The following top-level fields apply to both setups:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following top-level fields apply to both Prometheus and OTLP setups:
```

`level`
: Verbosity of the Collector's internal metrics. One of `none`, `basic`, `normal` (default), or `detailed`. Set `level: detailed` to enable `views`.

`readers`

> : List of metric readers. At least one is required when `level` is not `none`. Each reader is either a `pull` reader (Prometheus) or a `periodic` reader (OTLP, console).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
: List of metric readers. At least one is required when `level` is not `none`. Each reader is either a `pull` reader (Prometheus) or a `periodic` reader (OTLP or console).
```

{{< img src="/opentelemetry/collector_exporter/collector_health_metrics.png" alt="OpenTelemetry Collector health metrics dashboard" style="width:100%;" >}}

> The OpenTelemetry Collector exposes its own internal telemetry as metrics, which you can collect and send to Datadog to monitor Collector health and pipeline throughput.

Reviewer 2: "its own" is slightly redundant with "Collector" as the subject; splitting also tightens the sentence.

```suggestion
The OpenTelemetry Collector exposes internal telemetry as metrics. You can collect these metrics and send them to Datadog to monitor Collector health and pipeline throughput.
```

> You can collect Collector health metrics two ways:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can collect Collector health metrics in two ways:
```

- **Prometheus**: Scrape the Collector's internal Prometheus endpoint with the [Prometheus receiver][1] and forward the metrics through a metrics pipeline to the Datadog Exporter.
- **OTLP**: Configure the Collector's internal telemetry to export metrics directly to the [Datadog OTLP metrics intake endpoint][4] over OTLP HTTP.

## Setup

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab "Prometheus" %}}

> Configure the Collector to expose its internal metrics on a Prometheus pull endpoint, then scrape that endpoint with the [Prometheus receiver][101] and route the data through a metrics pipeline to the [Datadog Exporter][102].

Reviewer 2: 30-word sentence with three clauses; splitting reads more clearly.

```suggestion
Configure the Collector to expose its internal metrics on a Prometheus pull endpoint. Then scrape that endpoint with the [Prometheus receiver][101] and route the data through a metrics pipeline to the [Datadog Exporter][102].
```

                port: 8888
                without_type_suffix: true
                without_units: true
                without_scope_info: true
                # with_resource_constant_labels:
                #   included: ["service.name", "service.instance.id"]
                #   excluded: []
      # views:
      #   - selector:
      #       instrument_name: otelcol_processor_*
      #     stream:
      #       aggregation:
      #         drop: {}
  pipelines:
    metrics:
      receivers: [prometheus/internal]
      exporters: [datadog]
```

The `service.telemetry.metrics` block exposes the Collector's internal metrics on `0.0.0.0:8888`. The `prometheus/internal` receiver scrapes that same endpoint and the metrics pipeline forwards them to Datadog.

**Top-level fields under `service.telemetry.metrics`:**

`level`
: Verbosity of the Collector's internal metrics. One of `none`, `basic`, `normal` (default), or `detailed`. `detailed` is required to enable `views`.

`readers`
: List of metric readers. At least one is required when `level` is not `none`. Each reader is either a `pull` reader (Prometheus) or a `periodic` reader (OTLP, console).

`views`

> : Optional list of [SDK views][109] to drop, rename, filter attributes on, or change the aggregation of specific instruments. Only available when `level: detailed`.

Reviewer 2: Parallel structure is uneven ("drop", "rename", "filter attributes on", "change the aggregation of").

```suggestion
: Optional list of [SDK views][109] that drop, rename, filter, or re-aggregate specific instruments. Only available when `level: detailed`.
```

**`pull.exporter.prometheus` options:**

`host` / `port`
: Address to expose the Prometheus endpoint on. Defaults to `localhost:8888`. Use `0.0.0.0` to expose outside the loopback interface.

`without_type_suffix`
: When `true`, drops the type suffix (for example, `_total` for counters) from metric names. The Collector defaults to `true`, which produces names such as `otelcol_exporter_sent_metric_points` instead of `otelcol_exporter_sent_metric_points_total`.

`without_units`
: When `true`, drops the unit suffix (for example, `_seconds`, `_bytes`) from metric names.

`without_scope_info`
: When `true`, suppresses the `otel_scope_info` metric and `otel_scope_*` labels.

`with_resource_constant_labels.included` / `with_resource_constant_labels.excluded`

> : Allow- and deny-lists of resource attributes to copy onto every exported metric as constant labels.

Reviewer 2: `allowlist`/`denylist` are one word per the Datadog word list; the hyphenated "Allow-/deny-lists" form reads awkwardly.

```suggestion
: Allowlist and denylist of resource attributes to copy onto every exported metric as constant labels.
```

#### Optional: tag with resource attributes

Use `service.telemetry.resource` to attach resource attributes (such as `k8s.cluster.name`, `service.instance.id`, or any [Datadog-mapped semantic convention][103]) to all telemetry the Collector emits about itself.

> The legacy inline map format is concise:

Reviewer 2: Reads as a fragment-as-lead-in to the code block.

```suggestion
Use the legacy inline map format for a concise definition:
```

```yaml
service:
  telemetry:
    resource:
      k8s.cluster.name: my-cluster
      k8s.pod.name: ${env:HOSTNAME}
      service.instance.id: ${env:HOSTNAME}
      deployment.environment: prod
```

The declarative `attributes` format supports explicit typing and a `schema_url`:

```yaml
service:
  telemetry:
    resource:
      schema_url: https://opentelemetry.io/schemas/1.27.0
      attributes:
        - name: k8s.cluster.name
          value: my-cluster
        - name: k8s.pod.name
          value: ${env:HOSTNAME}
      detectors:
        attributes:
          included: [host.id, host.name, cloud.provider, cloud.region]
          excluded: []
```

> `detectors.attributes.included` and `detectors.attributes.excluded` allow- or deny-list attributes contributed by SDK-side resource detectors. To set an attribute to a null value (suppressing a default such as `service.version`), specify it with a null value in the legacy inline format.

Reviewer 2: Two issues in this paragraph: "allow-/deny-list" used as a hyphenated verb (Datadog word list prefers `allowlist`/`denylist` as one word), and the recursive "set an attribute to a null value... specify it with a null value" phrasing.

```suggestion
Use `detectors.attributes.included` and `detectors.attributes.excluded` to allowlist or denylist attributes contributed by SDK-side resource detectors. To suppress a default attribute such as `service.version`, specify it with a null value in the legacy inline format.
```

`insecure`
: When `true`, disables TLS. Defaults to `false`.

`certificate`, `client_certificate`, `client_key`
: Paths to PEM files for custom CA verification and mTLS client authentication.

#### Optional: tag with resource attributes

Use `service.telemetry.resource` to attach resource attributes (such as `k8s.cluster.name`, `service.instance.id`, or any [Datadog-mapped semantic convention][202]) to all telemetry the Collector emits about itself.

The legacy inline map format is concise:

```yaml
service:
  telemetry:
    resource:
      k8s.cluster.name: my-cluster
      k8s.pod.name: ${env:HOSTNAME}
      service.instance.id: ${env:HOSTNAME}
      deployment.environment: prod
```

The declarative `attributes` format supports explicit typing and a `schema_url`:

```yaml
service:
  telemetry:
    resource:
      schema_url: https://opentelemetry.io/schemas/1.27.0
      attributes:
        - name: k8s.cluster.name
          value: my-cluster
        - name: k8s.pod.name
          value: ${env:HOSTNAME}
      detectors:
        attributes:
          included: [host.id, host.name, cloud.provider, cloud.region]
          excluded: []
```

> `detectors.attributes.included` and `detectors.attributes.excluded` allow- or deny-list attributes contributed by SDK-side resource detectors. To set an attribute to a null value (suppressing a default such as `service.version`), specify it with a null value in the legacy inline format.

Reviewer 2: The OTLP tab duplicates several Prometheus-tab paragraphs verbatim, so the same wording fixes apply here. If the duplication is removed (see the higher-level note), this resolves itself; otherwise, please mirror the fixes from the Prometheus tab on the corresponding lines:

- Line 228 (`views` definition) — same parallel-structure fix as line 89.
- Line 271 ("The legacy inline map format is concise:") — same fix as line 112.
- Line 301 (this paragraph: "allow- or deny-list" + recursive null phrasing) — same fix as line 142.

Author: Makes sense, I moved the common sections down so that each tab doesn't need to repeat it
